# batplotR - BatScope Data Visualization in R

## About `batplotR`

`batplotR` is a `R` package to visualize data generated with [BatScope](http://www.wsl.ch/dienstleistungen/produkte/software/batscope/index_DE) and allows simple visualization of short (one night) and long (many nights) time-series of ultrasound calls recorded with a BatLogger. All you need is a Excel file export from BatScope. Most functions can be accessed from within a [Shiny](http://shiny.rstudio.com) web-app.

## How to install

To install `batplotr` you need the [`devtools`](https://github.com/hadley/devtools)package which can be installed from CRAN. Once installed you can run the following code to get the latest version `batplotr`:

```r
library(devtools)
install_github("dcangst/batplotr")
```

or to get a specific version:

```r
library(devtools)
install_github("dcangst/batplotr", ref="v0.1")
```

## Standalone Shiny Web App

The package includes the function `shiny_batPlots()`. It launches a shiny web app that replicates most futures of the package in a web app. For ease of use you can set up a script to launch the web app directly from your computer.

### Mac OS / probably other UNIX systems (tested in MacOSX 10.10.3 only)
Paste the following code into a plain text file with extension '.command'
```shell
#!/usr/bin/Rscript
suppressMessages(library(batplotr))
shiny_batPlots()
```
The file then needs to be made executable, which you can do in the terminal using the following command:
```
chmod +x /path/to/shellfile.command
```
(you can drag and drop the file into the terminal so you don't have to type the path).
You need to have the package installed in `R`. This can also be achieved using a similar script to install/update the package.

### Windows (untested)
This should work for Windows, save with extension `.bat`:
```bat
X:\path\to\Rscript.exe -e "suppressMessages(library(batplotr));shiny_batPlots()"
```

## Usage in R

see `?batplotr` for more information on the individual functions. for simple plots run this example using a .xlsx generated by BatScope Export

```r
batScopeData <- readBatscopeXLSX()
batScopeData_sum <- sumBatscopeData()
nightPlot(batScopeData_sum)
periodPlot(batScopeData_sum)
```

ther is also a detailed manual [here](http://dcangst.github.io/batplotr/batplotr_anleitung.html), but unfortunately in German only.



